PEP 708: Extending the Repository API to Mitigate Dependency Confusion Attacks (#3019)
python/peps: pep-0708.rst

installed from their repositories located at ``https://download.pytorch.org/``,
but that repository was designed to be used in conjunction with PyPI, and
the name of ``torchtriton`` was not claimed on PyPI, which allowed the attacker
to use that name and publish a malicious version.

This PEP proposes an extension to the Repository API that would enable
installers to determine when it is safe to install a given package that appears
in multiple repositories, allowing them to be stricter in the cases where they
do not know if it is safe.

Rationale
=========

Dependency Confusion attacks have long been possible, but they've recently
gained press with public examples of cases where these attacks were successfully
executed.

There are a number of ways to mitigate against these attacks today, but they all
require that the end user go out of their way to protect themselves, rather than
being protected by default. This means that for the vast bulk of users, they are
likely to remain vulnerable, even if they are ultimately aware of these types of
attacks.

Ultimately the underlying cause of these attacks come from the fact that there

> is no globally unique namespace that all Python package names come from, instead

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is no globally unique namespace that all Python package names come from. instead,
```
Fix run-on sentence

each repository is its own distinct namespace, and when given an "abstract" name

> such as ``spam`` to install, an installer has implicitly turn that into a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
such as ``spam`` to install, an installer has to implicitly turn that into a
```

"concrete" name such as ``pypi.org:spam`` or ``example.com:spam``. Currently

> the standard behavior in Python installation tools, is to implicitly flatten

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the standard behavior in Python installation tools is to implicitly flatten
```

these multiple namespaces into one that contains the files from all namespaces.

This implicit assumption that collapsing the namespaces is what was expected,
means that that when it was not (such as in the ``torchtriton`` case) dependency
confusion attacks become possible.

What makes this particularly tricky is two competing things:

1. Collapsing the namespaces is exactly the behavior that you want at times, for

>    instance the Piwheels project which does not manage a namespace of it's own,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   instance the Piwheels project which does not manage a namespace of its own,
```

   but rather exists to supplment the namespace from PyPI with additional files.

> 2. Not collapsing the namespaces is the behavior that you want, for instances

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Not collapsing the namespaces is the behavior that you want for instances
```

   like ``torchtriton`` where the name on PyPI and the name on PyTorch's
   repositories were fundamentally different things.

So an installer needs some mechanism by which to determine when it should
flatten the namespaces of multiple repositories and when it should not, rather

> than having to either choose between always flattening and never flattening.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
than having to choose between always flattening and never flattening.
```

This functionaly could be pushed directly into the end user, since ultimately
the end user is the person whose expectations of what gets installed from what
repository actually matters. However, by extending the repository specification
to allow a repository to indicate when it is safe, we can enable individual

> projects and repositories the ability to "work by default", even when their

Reviewer: ```suggestion
projects and repositories to "work by default", even when their
```
The current sentence is "enable ... the ability" which doesn't make sense.

          "hashes": {"sha256": "...", "blake2b": "..."},
          "requires-python": ">=3.7",
          "dist-info-metadata": true
        }
      ]
    }

or

  .. code-block:: HTML

    <!DOCTYPE html>
    <html>
      <head>
        <meta name="pypi:repository-version" content="1.0">
        <meta name="pypi:tracks" content="https://pypi.org/simple/holygrail/">
      </head>
      <body>
        <a href="https://example.com/files/holygrail-1.0.tar.gz#sha256=...">
        <a href="https://example.com/files/holygrail-1.0-py3-none-any.whl#sha256=...">
      </body>
    </html>

There are a few key properties that **MUST** be observed when using this
metadata:

- It **MUST** be under the control of the repository operators themselves, not
  any individual publisher using that repository.

- It **MUST** represent the same "project" as the project at the referenced URL.

  - This does not mean that it needs to serve the same files. It is valid for it
    to include binaries built on different platforms, copies with local patches
    being applied, etc. This is purposefully left vague as it's ultimately up to

>     the expectations that the users have of the repository and it's operators

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    the expectations that the users have of the repository and its operators
```

    what exactly constitutes the "same" project.

- It **MUST** point to the repository that "owns" the namespace, not another
  repository that is also tracking that namespace.

- It **MUST** point to a project with the exact same name (taking into account
  normalization).

It is **NOT** required that every name in a repository tracks the same
repository, or that they all track a repository at all. Mixed use repositories
where some names track a repository and some names do not are explicitly
allowed.

At first glance, this may appear to be unsafe because it's allowing a repository
to lay claim to a namespace that is originating in another repository. However,
in the Python ecosystem, whenever a user decides to install from a particular
repository, they are implicitly trusting the operators of that repository.
Nothing we provide here can allow repository operators to operate without the
user granting them that trust.

This means that given the users trust the repository operators, then it is safe
for them to trust the repository operators when they provide information about
which repositories they are tracking.

> It is also not ambiguous what repository a user is referring to, given a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is also not ambiguous what repository a user is referring to: given a
```

repository like ``https://example.com/``, there is only one owner of example.com
globally, so there is no ambiguity who the user is intending to trust.

> The same is not true for projects that have been published to a repository, the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The same is not true for projects that have been published to a repository. The
```

whole fundamental problem is that we're trying to turn an ambiguous name into a
concrete name, so we don't have any inherent trust in the publishers for any of
the projects from disparate repositories.

"Alternate Locations" Metadata
------------------------------

Another valid use case for having a project extend over multiple repositories is
in cases where the project wants to publish to one "main" repository, but then
have additional repositories that provide binaries for additional platforms,
GPUs, CPUs, etc. Currently wheel tags are not sufficiently able to express these
types of binary compatibility, so projects that wish to rely on them are forced

> to setup multiple repositories and have their users manually select them to get

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to set up multiple repositories and have their users manually select them to get
```

"better" binaries, but still wish to provide some default binaries on the main
repository.

This could be implemented using the "tracks" metadata, as it conceptually is

> expressing the same thing, however the "tracks" metadata relies on the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
expressing the same thing, but the "tracks" metadata relies on the
```

> repository operator retaining control for the security of it, and that would

Reviewer: ```suggestion
repository operator retaining control for security purposes, and that would
```

> mean that projects would be forced to stand up their own repositories for this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
mean that projects would be forced to set up their own repositories for this
```
Unless this is a meaning of "stand up" that I'm not aware of

      </body>
    </html>

There are a few key properties that **MUST** be observed when using this
metadata:

- In order for this metadata to be trusted, there **MUST** be agreement between
  all locations where that project is found as to what the alternate locations
  are.
- When using alternate locations, clients **MUST** implicitly assume that the
  url the response was fetched from was included in the list. This means, that
  if you fetch from ``https://pypi.org/simple/foo/`` and it has an
  ``alternate-locations`` metadata that has the value
  ``["https://example.com/simple/foo/"]``, then you **MUST** treat it as if it
  had the value
  ``["https://example.com/simple/foo/", "https://pypi.org/simple/foo/"]``.
- Order of the elements within the array does not have any particular meaning.

When an installer encounters a project that spans multiple remote repositories,
it will look at this alternate location metadata, and if they all agree on the
same set of data AND the locations that installer located files at are a subset
of the alternate locations, then the installer will implicitly merge those
locations as they does now.

> If any location that installer found files at does not exist in the list of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If any location that the installer found files at does not exist in the list of
```

alternate locations, then the installer SHOULD NOT assume it is safe to flatten
the namespace, unless some other trusted information informs the installer of
that.

Recommendations
===============

This section is non-normative, it provides recommendations to installers in how

> to interpret this metadata, that this PEP feels provides the best trade off

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to interpret this metadata, that this PEP feels provides the best tradeoff
```

between protecting users by default and minimizing breakages to existing
workflows. These recommendations are not binding, and installers are free to
ignore them, or apply them selectively as they make sense in their specific
situations.

File Discovery Algorithm
------------------------

> *Note: This algoritm is written based on how pip currently discovers files,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Note: This algorithm is written based on how pip currently discovers files,
```

other installers may adapt this based on their own discovery procedures.*

Currently the "standard" file discovery algorithm looks something like this:

1. Generate a list of all files across all configured repositories.

> 2. Filter out any files that do match known hashes from a lockfile or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Filter out any files that do not match known hashes from a lockfile or
```

   requirements file.
3. Filter out any files that do not match the current platform, Python version,
   etc.
4. Pass that list of files into the resolver where it will attempt to resolve
   the "best" match out of those files, irrespective of what repository it came
   from.

It is recommended that installers change their file discovery algorithm to take
into account the new metadata, and instead do:

1. Generate a list of all files across all configured repositories.

> 2. Filter out any files that do match known hashes from a lockfile or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Filter out any files that do not match known hashes from a lockfile or
```

   otherwise continue.
5. Filter out any files that do not match the current platform, Python version,
   etc.
6. Pass that list of files into the resolver where it will attempt to resolve
   the "best" match out of those files, irrespective of what repository it came
   from.

This is somewhat subtle, but the key things in the recommendation are:

- Users who are using lock files or requirements files that include specific
  hashes of artifacts that are "valid" are assumed to be protected by nature of
  those hashes, since the rest of these recommendations would apply during
  hash generation, thus we filter out unknown hashes up front.
- If the user has explicitly told the installer that it wants to fetch a project
  from a certain set of repositories, then there is no reason to question that
  and we assume that they've made sure it is safe to merge those namespaces.
- If the project in question only comes from a single repository, then there is
  no chance of dependency confusion, so there's no reason to do anything but
  allow.
- We check for the metadata in this PEP before filtering out based on platform,

>   python, etc because we don't want errors that only show up on certain

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Python version, etc., because we don't want errors that only show up on certain
```

  platforms, Python versions, etc.
- If nothing tells us merging the namespaces is safe, we refuse to implicitly
  assume it is, and generate an error instead.
- Otherwise we merge the namespaces, and continue on.

This algorithm ensures that an installer never assumes that two disparate
namespaces can be flattened into one, which for all practical purposes
eliminates the possibility of any kind of dependency confusion attack, while
still giving power throughout the stack in a safe way to allow people to
explicitly declare when those disparate namespaces are actually one logical

> namespace than can be safely merged.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
namespace that can be safely merged.
```

> The above algorithm is mostly a conceptual model, In reality the algorithm may

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above algorithm is mostly a conceptual model. In reality the algorithm may
```

end up being slightly different in order to be more privacy preserving and
faster, or even just adapted to fit a specific installer better.

Explicit Configuration for End Users
------------------------------------

This PEP avoids dictating or recommending a specific mechanism by which an
installer allows an end user to configure exactly what repositories it wants a
specific package to be installed from. However, it does recommend that
installers do provide *some* mechanism for end users to provide that

> configuration, as without it users can end up in a DoS situation where in cases

Reviewer: ```suggestion
configuration, as without it users can end up in a DoS situation in cases
```

the namespace collision externally (get the name taken down on one repository,
stand up a personal repository that handles the merging, etc).

This configuration also allows end users to pre-emptively secure themselves
during what is likely to be a long transition until the default behavior is
safe.

Rejected Ideas
==============

*Note: Some of these are somewhat specific to pip, but any solution that doesn't
work for pip isn't a particularly useful solution.*

Implicitly allow mirrors when the list of files are the same
------------------------------------------------------------

If every repository returns the exact same list of files, then it is safe to
consider those repositories to be the same namespace and implicitly merge them.
This would possibly mean that mirrors would be automatically allowed without any
work on any user or repository operator's part.

Unfortunately, this has two failings that make it undesirable:

- It only solves the case of mirrors that are exact copies of each other, but
  not repositories that "track" another one, which ends up being a more generic
  solution.
- Even in the case of exact mirrors, multiple repositories mirroring each other

>   is a distributed system that will not always be fully consistent with each

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  is a distributed system will not always be fully consistent with each
```

  other, effectively an eventually consistent system. This means that
  repositories that relied on this implicit heuristic to work would have
  sporadic failures due to drift between the source repository and the mirror
  repositories.

Provide a mechanism to order the repositories
---------------------------------------------

Providing some mechanism to give the repositories an order, and then short
circuiting the discovery algorithm when it finds the first repository that
provides files for that project is another workable solution that is safe if the
order is specified correctly.

However, this has been rejected for a number of reasons:

- We've spent 15+ years educating users that the ordering of repositories being
  specified is not meaningful, and they effectively have an undefined order. It
  would be difficult to backpedal on that and start saying that now order
  matters.
- Users can easily rearrange the order that they specify their repositories in

>   within a single location, however when loading repositories from multiple

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  within a single location, but when loading repositories from multiple
```

if the namespaces are incorrectly merged or not.

This is certainly a solution, unfortunately it also suffers from problems that
make it unworkable:

- It requires users to opt in to it, so users are still unprotected by default.
- It requires users to do a bunch of labor to manage their hashes, which is
  something that most users are unlikely to be willing to do.
- It is difficult and verbose to get the protection when not using a
  ``requirements.txt`` file as the source of your dependencies (this affects
  build time dependencies, and dependencies provided at the command line).
- It only sort of solves the problem, in a way it just shifts the responsibility
  of the problem to be whatever system is generating the hashes that the
  installer would use. If that system isn't a human manually validating hashes,
  which it's unlikely it would be, then we've just shifted the question of how
  to merge these namespaces to whatever tool implements the maintenance of the
  hashes.

Require all projects to exist in the "default" repository
---------------------------------------------------------

Another idea is that we can narrow the scope of ``--extra-index-url`` such that

> it's only supported use is to refer to supplemental repositories to the default

Reviewer: ```suggestion
its only supported use is to refer to supplemental repositories to the default
```

there's a whole little slice of the namespace that wholly belongs to you, and
you can easily write a rule that assigns an entire scope to a specific non
public registry.

Unfortunately, it basically ends up being an easier version of the idea to only
use explicit configuration, which works ok in npm because its not particularly
common for people to use their own registries, but in Python we encourage you to
do just that.

Open questions
==============

1. The `original proposal document <https://docs.google.com/document/d/184fQkb6NggVQfYmjTDA7p_U3iWDKk6grc2DigT1X3Es/>`__
   was targeted more specifically to a change to pip, and went into more
   specific details as to what we expected from pip. Since dictating UX to
   installers isn't something that we do in PEPs, I've rewritten those parts to
   be more generic, however that means that we lose the information on
   repository files. Is that fine? Or should we standardize what a repository
   file looks like so the same file can be given to multiple installers instead
   of hand waving around the specific mechanism installers would use for
   explicit configuration?

> 2. Is the Appendix section on communicating the change useful or confusing?

Reviewer: For what it's worth, I think it's useful. It actually fits well with the "How to Teach This" section in the standard PEP template.

Author: Yea, I tend to lean towards it being helpful, my main concern was it side tracking discussion or random people finding it and thinking it's an actual announcement of some kind, but I left the question open in case someone felt strongly about it being too specific to pip.

Reviewer 2: I find it helpful, and you could include it as part of the "How to Teach This" section in this PEP. Alternatively, if you want to separate it from the main PEP content, you could put it into a separate `rst` document in the `pep-0708/` directory and use a ref target label to link it here instead.

Author: I've moved the Appendix to a "How to Communicate This" section and removed the open question. Thanks!

PEP: 708

> Title: Preventing Dependency Confusion Attacks

Author: I'm struggling to come up with a great title for this (and tbh I'm not super happy with the current title either).

By itself the changes to the repository API do not do anything to prevent dependency confusion attacks, rather they provide installers with enough information to prevent dependency confusion attacks with less collateral damage. I thought about focusing the title, abstract, etc entirely on the fact we're extending the repository API to enable cross repository namepspaces, but then the rationale or motivation section gets awkward I think, because the driver of this change is still dependency confusion.

> Title: Preventing Dependency Confusion Attacks

Author: I've pushed a change now that doesn't change the title (yet anyways) but that refactors the Abstract, Motivation, Rationale, and Specification to try and make the above clearer. I'm still coming up with a blank for a better title though, I'll keeping noodling on it.

> Title: Preventing Dependency Confusion Attacks

Reviewer 3: Don't frown but this is a language-ish question; so I used an LLM (ChatGPT) to generate a bunch of PEP titles.

It came up with "Mitigating Dependency Confusion Attacks with Namespace Extensions" which... seems OK? If you'd like to look at the word soup it generated, here's a [Gist](https://gist.github.com/pradyunsg/777d419fec69e5be3bad9ccb77816849) of it.

> Title: Preventing Dependency Confusion Attacks

Reviewer 2: > I'm struggling to come up with a great title for this (and tbh I'm not super happy with the current title either).

Yeah, same—I tried playing around with a couple different avenues but I couldn't find any that seemed to work well without being too long (which is why I didn't actually suggest any, heh).

> It came up with "Mitigating Dependency Confusion Attacks with Namespace Extensions" which... seems OK? If you'd like to look at the word soup it generated, here's a [Gist](https://gist.github.com/pradyunsg/777d419fec69e5be3bad9ccb77816849) of it.

Riffing off that and based on what @dstufft said above, how about something like

```suggestion
Title: Extending the Repository API to Mitigate Dependency Confusion Attacks
```

> Title: Preventing Dependency Confusion Attacks

Author: That works for me

Author: Donald Stufft <donald@stufft.io>
PEP-Delegate: Paul Moore <p.f.moore@gmail.com>
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Topic: Packaging
Content-Type: text/x-rst

> Created: 20-Feb-2023

Author: Sure. I wasn't sure if it was kosher to include a link to the "pre pep" discussion or not.

> Created: 20-Feb-2023

Reviewer 2: Yeah, in the past it wasn't generally done so much, but as the syntax and semantics of this field has shifted from just being a list of dates the PEP was posted to email lists, to nowadays linking/documenting the full discussion history of the PEP, many PEP authors have started to add the discussion(s) that directly led to the PEP here, which I've found similarly helpful to readers and tools interested the PEP's discussion history, both while the PEP is a draft (to see that it didn't come out of thin air) and for posterity.

Abstract
========

There is a long-standing class of attacks that are called "dependency confusion"
attacks, which roughly boil down to an individual user expected to get package
``A``, but instead they got ``B``. In Python, this almost always happens due to
the configuration of multiple repositories (possibly including the default of
PyPI), where they expected package ``A`` to come from repository ``X``, but
someone is able to publish to repository ``Y`` under the same name.

A specific example of this is the recent case where the PyTorch project had an
internal project named ``torchtriton`` which was only ever intended to be
installed from their repositories located at ``https://download.pytorch.org/``,
but that repository was designed to be used in conjunction with PyPI, and
the name of ``torchtriton`` was not claimed on PyPI, which allowed the attacker

> to use that name and publish a malicious version.

Author: Moved to Motivation

This PEP proposes an extension to the Repository API that would enable
installers to determine when it is safe to install a given package that appears
in multiple repositories, allowing them to be stricter in the cases where they
do not know if it is safe.

Rationale
=========

Dependency Confusion attacks have long been possible, but they've recently
gained press with public examples of cases where these attacks were successfully

> executed.

Reviewer 2: Linking to some of these examples (or the press regarding them) would seem prudent here.

Author: Added some links and moved the `torchtriton` example to here to better support this claim.

There are a number of ways to mitigate against these attacks today, but they all
require that the end user go out of their way to protect themselves, rather than
being protected by default. This means that for the vast bulk of users, they are
likely to remain vulnerable, even if they are ultimately aware of these types of
attacks.

Ultimately the underlying cause of these attacks come from the fact that there
is no globally unique namespace that all Python package names come from.
Instead, each repository is its own distinct namespace, and when given an
"abstract" name such as ``spam`` to install, an installer has to implicitly turn
that into a "concrete" name such as ``pypi.org:spam`` or ``example.com:spam``.
Currently the standard behavior in Python installation tools is to implicitly
flatten these multiple namespaces into one that contains the files from all
namespaces.

This implicit assumption that collapsing the namespaces is what was expected,
means that that when it was not (such as in the ``torchtriton`` case) dependency
confusion attacks become possible.

What makes this particularly tricky is two competing things:

> 1. Collapsing the namespaces is exactly the behavior that you want at times, for
>    instance the Piwheels project which does not manage a namespace of its own,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Collapsing the namespaces is exactly the behavior that you want at times;
   for instance, the `Piwheels project <https://www.piwheels.org/>`_
   does not manage a namespace of its own,
```

* Fix grammar error (comma splice)

Currently the standard behavior in Python installation tools is to implicitly
flatten these multiple namespaces into one that contains the files from all
namespaces.

This implicit assumption that collapsing the namespaces is what was expected,
means that that when it was not (such as in the ``torchtriton`` case) dependency
confusion attacks become possible.

What makes this particularly tricky is two competing things:

1. Collapsing the namespaces is exactly the behavior that you want at times;
   for instance, the `Piwheels project <https://www.piwheels.org/>`_
   does not manage a namespace of its own,
   but rather exists to supplment the namespace from PyPI with additional files.
2. Not collapsing the namespaces is the behavior that you want for instances
   like ``torchtriton`` where the name on PyPI and the name on PyTorch's
   repositories were fundamentally different things.

So an installer needs some mechanism by which to determine when it should
flatten the namespaces of multiple repositories and when it should not, rather
than having to choose between always flattening and never flattening.

> This functionaly could be pushed directly into the end user, since ultimately

Reviewer 4: Found via `make spellcheck` (and including CAM's suggestion):
```suggestion
This functionality could be pushed directly to the end user, since ultimately
```

the end user is the person whose expectations of what gets installed from what
repository actually matters. However, by extending the repository specification
to allow a repository to indicate when it is safe, we can enable individual
projects and repositories to "work by default", even when their
project naturally spans multiple distinct namespaces, while maintaining the
ability for an installer to be secure by default.

Specification
=============

> This specification defines version 1.2 of the simple repository API to make the

Author: Good catch, that's what I get for copy/pasting from the original PEPs.

following changes:

- Bumping the api version to 1.2.
- Repository "Tracks" Metadata
- "Alternate Locations" Metadata

Repository "Tracks" Metadata
----------------------------

A valid use case for when an installer should merge the same name from two
repositories is in the case when one repository isn't actually defining its
own namespace, but rather is extending the namespace provided for by another
repository. This commonly happens in cases where a project is being mirrored
from one repository to another or when a repository is providing supplementary
artifacts such as providing binary wheels for a specific platform.

In this case neither the repository nor the projects that are being "tracked"

> may have any knowledge they are being tracked or by who, so this cannot rely on

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
may have any knowledge that they are being tracked or by whom, so this cannot rely on
```
grammar tweaks

> any information that isn't present in the "tracking" repository itself.

Author: Refactored to create a dedicated Rationale section.

  repository that is also tracking that namespace.

- It **MUST** point to a project with the exact same name (taking into account
  normalization).

It is **NOT** required that every name in a repository tracks the same
repository, or that they all track a repository at all. Mixed use repositories
where some names track a repository and some names do not are explicitly
allowed.

At first glance, this may appear to be unsafe because it's allowing a repository
to lay claim to a namespace that is originating in another repository. However,
in the Python ecosystem, whenever a user decides to install from a particular
repository, they are implicitly trusting the operators of that repository.
Nothing we provide here can allow repository operators to operate without the
user granting them that trust.

This means that given the users trust the repository operators, then it is safe
for them to trust the repository operators when they provide information about
which repositories they are tracking.

It is also not ambiguous what repository a user is referring to: given a
repository like ``https://example.com/``, there is only one owner of example.com

> globally, so there is no ambiguity who the user is intending to trust.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
globally, so there is no ambiguity over who the user is intending to trust.
```
(or "as to")

The same is not true for projects that have been published to a repository. The
whole fundamental problem is that we're trying to turn an ambiguous name into a
concrete name, so we don't have any inherent trust in the publishers for any of

> the projects from disparate repositories.

Author: Refactored to create a dedicated Rationale section.

Another valid use case for having a project extend over multiple repositories is
in cases where the project wants to publish to one "main" repository, but then
have additional repositories that provide binaries for additional platforms,
GPUs, CPUs, etc. Currently wheel tags are not sufficiently able to express these
types of binary compatibility, so projects that wish to rely on them are forced
to set up multiple repositories and have their users manually select them to get
"better" binaries, but still wish to provide some default binaries on the main
repository.

This could be implemented using the "tracks" metadata, as it conceptually is
expressing the same thing, but the "tracks" metadata relies on the
repository operator retaining control for security purposes, and that would
mean that projects would be forced to set up their own repositories for this
use case even if there is a public, open repository that they would prefer to
use instead.

There's also the danger that if we don't provide a way for repositories to let
publishers express this same relationship, that they will be incentivized to
break the contract of the "tracks" metadata to give that ability to their users

> and then reintroduce the original insecurity.

Author: Refactored to create a dedicated Rationale section.

      </body>
    </html>

There are a few key properties that **MUST** be observed when using this
metadata:

- In order for this metadata to be trusted, there **MUST** be agreement between
  all locations where that project is found as to what the alternate locations
  are.
- When using alternate locations, clients **MUST** implicitly assume that the
  url the response was fetched from was included in the list. This means, that
  if you fetch from ``https://pypi.org/simple/foo/`` and it has an
  ``alternate-locations`` metadata that has the value
  ``["https://example.com/simple/foo/"]``, then you **MUST** treat it as if it
  had the value
  ``["https://example.com/simple/foo/", "https://pypi.org/simple/foo/"]``.
- Order of the elements within the array does not have any particular meaning.

When an installer encounters a project that spans multiple remote repositories,
it will look at this alternate location metadata, and if they all agree on the
same set of data AND the locations that installer located files at are a subset
of the alternate locations, then the installer will implicitly merge those

> locations as they does now.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
locations as it does now.
```
(or "as they do now", if talking about multiple installers)

the namespace, unless some other trusted information informs the installer of
that.

Recommendations
===============

This section is non-normative, it provides recommendations to installers in how
to interpret this metadata, that this PEP feels provides the best tradeoff
between protecting users by default and minimizing breakages to existing
workflows. These recommendations are not binding, and installers are free to
ignore them, or apply them selectively as they make sense in their specific
situations.

File Discovery Algorithm
------------------------

*Note: This algorithm is written based on how pip currently discovers files,
other installers may adapt this based on their own discovery procedures.*

Currently the "standard" file discovery algorithm looks something like this:

1. Generate a list of all files across all configured repositories.
2. Filter out any files that do not match known hashes from a lockfile or
   requirements file.
3. Filter out any files that do not match the current platform, Python version,
   etc.
4. Pass that list of files into the resolver where it will attempt to resolve

>    the "best" match out of those files, irrespective of what repository it came

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
   the "best" match out of those files, irrespective of which repository it came
```

  sporadic failures due to drift between the source repository and the mirror
  repositories.

Provide a mechanism to order the repositories
---------------------------------------------

Providing some mechanism to give the repositories an order, and then short
circuiting the discovery algorithm when it finds the first repository that
provides files for that project is another workable solution that is safe if the
order is specified correctly.

However, this has been rejected for a number of reasons:

- We've spent 15+ years educating users that the ordering of repositories being
  specified is not meaningful, and they effectively have an undefined order. It
  would be difficult to backpedal on that and start saying that now order
  matters.
- Users can easily rearrange the order that they specify their repositories in
  within a single location, but when loading repositories from multiple
  locations (env var, conf file, requirements file, cli arguments) the order is
  hard coded into pip. While it would be a deterministic and documented order,
  there's no reason to assume it's the order that the user wants their

>   repositories to be defined in, forcing them to contort thow they configure pip

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  repositories to be defined in, forcing them to contort how they configure pip
```

  so that the implicit ordering ends up being the correct one.
- The above can be mitigated by providing a way to explicitly declare the order

>   rather than by implicitly using the order they were defined in, however that

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  rather than by implicitly using the order they were defined in; however, that
```

Comma splice again

  then means that the protections are not provided unless the user does some
  explicit configuration.
- Ordering assumes that there is a linear ordering of repositories where two
  repositories have the same name, we always prefer repositories in the same

>   order for every project, however that is not necessarily true.

Reviewer 2: I'm having trouble parsing the intended syntax and semantics of the sentence, to the point where I unfortunately can't provide a specific suggestion I'm confident in to better express what you likely mean here.

Author: I've reworded this to say:

> Ordering assumes that one repository is *always* preferred over another repository without any way to decide on a project by project basis.

> - Relying on ordering is subtle, if I look at an ordering of repositories, I

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Relying on ordering is subtle; if I look at an ordering of repositories, I
```

Another comma splice error

>   have no way of knowing in advance or ensuring in advance what names are going

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  have no way of knowing or ensuring in advance what names are going
```

I've generally avoided suggesting fixes to repetition issues, but here it results in the syntax being particularly contorted, has a clear solution and seems likely to be an editing typo

  to come from what repositories. I can only know in that moment what names are
  provided by which repositories.
- Relying on ordering is fragile. There's no reason to assume that two disparate

>   repositories are not going to have random naming collisions, what happens if
>   I'm using a library from a lower priority repository and then a higher
>   priority repository happens to start having a colliding name.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  repositories are not going to have random naming collisions—what happens if
  I'm using a library from a lower priority repository and then a higher
  priority repository happens to start having a colliding name?
```

I'm assuming you mean something like this, at least inferring from the existing syntax

- In cases where ordering does the wrong thing, it does so silently, with no
  feedback given to the user. This is by design because it doesn't actually know
  what the wrong or right thing is, it's just hoping that order will give the
  right thing, and if it does then users are protected without any breakage.
  However, when it does the wrong thing, users are left with a very confusing
  behavior coming from pip, where it's just silently installing the wrong thing.

There is a variant of this idea which effectively says that it's really just
PyPI's nature of open registration that causes the real problems, so if we treat
all repositories but the "default" one as equal priority, and then treat the
default one as a lower priority then we'll fix things.

That is true in that it does improve things, but it has many of the same

> problems as the general ordering idea (though not all of them), but it comes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
problems as the general ordering idea (though not all of them), and it comes
```

Fix grammar/semantics

> along with some of it's own:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
along with one of its own:
```

* Fix it's -> its
* There's only one thing listed here (which doesn't make so much sense to put in a list anyway...)

Did you mean to include something else?

Author: I think I originally had 2 items, then decided the second didn't make sense and dropped it and never fixed this.

  repository proxy when they need multiple repositories.

  - Removing facilities to have more than one repository configured has been
    rejected because it would be too disruptive to end users.

- A user may need different outcomes of merging multiple repositories in
  different contexts, or may need to merge different, mutually exclusive
  repositories. This means they'll need to actually setup multiple repository
  proxies for each unique set of options.

- It requires users to maintain infrastructure or it requires adding features in
  installers to automatically spin up a repository for each invocation.

- It doesn't actually change the requirement to need to have a solution to these
  problems, it just shifts the responsibility of implementation from installers
  to some repository proxy, but in either case we still need something that
  figures out how to merge these disparate namespaces.

- Ultimately, most users do not want to have to stand up a repository proxy just
  to safely interact with multiple repositories.

Rely only on hash checking
--------------------------

Another possible solution is to rely on hash checking, since with hash checking

> enabled users cannot get an artifact that they didn't expect, it doesn't matter

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
enabled users cannot get an artifact that they didn't expect; it doesn't matter
```

if the namespaces are incorrectly merged or not.

> This is certainly a solution, unfortunately it also suffers from problems that

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is certainly a solution; unfortunately it also suffers from problems that
```

make it unworkable:

- It requires users to opt in to it, so users are still unprotected by default.
- It requires users to do a bunch of labor to manage their hashes, which is
  something that most users are unlikely to be willing to do.

> - It is difficult and verbose to get the protection when not using a
>   ``requirements.txt`` file as the source of your dependencies (this affects

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- It is difficult and verbose to get the protection when users are not using a
  ``requirements.txt`` file as the source of their dependencies (this affects
```

Fix conflicting tense, as the former two bullets refer to users in the third person, not the second

namespace, and every additional repository just extends it with extra packages.

The implementation of this would roughly be to require that the project **MUST**
be registered with the default repository in order for any additional
repositories to work.

This sort of works if you successfully narrow the scope in that way, but
ultimately it has been rejected because:

- Users are unlikely to understand or accept this reduced scope, and thus are
  likely to attempt to continue to use it in the now unsupported fashion.

  - This is complicated by the fact that with the scope now narrowed, users who
    have the excluded workflow no longer have any alternative besides setting up
    a repository proxy, which takes infrastructure and effort that they
    previously didn't have to do.

- It assumes that just because a name in an "extra" repository is the same as in
  the default repository, that they are the same project. If we were starting
  from scratch in a brand new ecosystem then maybe we could make this assumption
  from the start and make it stick, but it's going to be incredibly difficult to
  get the ecosystem to adjust to that change.

>   - This is a fundamental issue with this approach, the underlying problem that

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - This is a fundamental issue with this approach; the underlying problem that
```

    drives dependency confusion is that we're taking disparate namespaces and
    flattening them into one. This approach essentially just declares that OK,
    and attempts to mitigate it by requiring everyone to register their names.

- Because of the above assumption, in cases where a name in an extra repository
  collides by accident with the default repository, it's going to appear to work
  for those users, but they are going to be silently in a state of dependency
  confusion.

  - This is made worse by the fact that the person who owns the name that is
    allowing this to work is going to be completely unaware of the role that
    they're playing for that user, and might possibly delete their project or
    hand it off to someone else, potentially allowing them to inadvertently
    allow a malicious user to take it over.

- Users are likely to attempt to get back to a working state by registering
  their names in their default repository as a defensive name squat. Their
  ability to do this will depend on the specific policies of their default
  repository, whether someone already has that name, whether it's too generic,

>   etc. At a best case scenario it will cause needless placeholder projects that

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  etc. As a best case scenario it will cause needless placeholder projects that
```

we have locally unique names that exist under multiple namespaces that we are
attempting to merge into a single flat namespace. If we could instead come up
with a way to have globally unique names, we could sidestep the entire issue.

This idea has been rejected because:

- Generating globally unique but secure names that are also meaningful to humans
  is a nearly impossible feat without piggybacking off of some kind of
  centralized database. To my knowledge the only systems that have managed to do
  this end up piggybacking off of the domain system and refer to packages by
  URLs with domains etc.
- Even if we come up with a mechanism to get globally unique names, our ability
  to retrofit that into our decades old system is practically zero without
  burning it all to the ground and starting over. The best we could probably do
  is declare that all non globally unique names are implicitly names on the PyPI
  domain name, and force everyone with a non PyPI package to rename their
  package.
- This would upend so many core assumptions and fundamental parts of our current
  system it's hard to even know where to start to list them.

> Only recommend installers offer explicit configuration

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Only recommend installers offering explicit configuration
```

------------------------------------------------------

One idea that has come up is to essentially just implement the explicit
configuration and don't make any other changes to anything else. The specific

> proposal for a mapping policy is what actually inspired explicit configuration

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
proposal for a mapping policy is what actually inspired the explicit configuration
```

Seems like you're missing a definite article here

option, and created a file that looked something like:

>   .. code-block:: JSON

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: JSON
```

Fix indent

    {
      "repositories": {
        "PyTorch": ["https://download.pytorch.org/whl/nightly"],
        "PyPI": ["https://pypi.org/simple"]
      },
      "mapping": [
        {
          "paths": ["torch*"],
          "repositories": ["PyTorch"],
          "terminating": true
        },
        {
          "paths": ["*"],
          "repositories": ["PyPI"]
        }
      ]
    }

The recommendation to have explicit configuration pushes the decision on how to
implement that onto each installer, allowing them to choose what works best for
their users.

Ultimately only implementing some kind of explicit configuration was rejected
because by its nature it's opt in, so it doesn't protect average users who are

> least capable to solve the problem with the existing tools, by adding additional

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
least capable to solve the problem with the existing tools; by adding additional
```

protections alongside the explicit configuration, we are able to protect all
users by default.

Additionally, relying on only explicit configuration also means that every end
user has to resolve the same problem over and over again, even in cases like
mirrors of PyPI, Piwheels, PyTorch, etc. In each and every case they have to sit
there and make decisions (or find some example to cargo cult) in order to be
secure. Adding extra features into the mix allows us to centralize those
protections where we can, while still giving advanced end users the ability to
completely control their own destiny.

Scopes à la npm
---------------

> There's been some suggestion that scopes similar to how npm has implemented them

Reviewer 2: It might be helpful to link to some overview/documentation of npm scopes here.

may ultimately solve this. Ultimately scopes do not change anything about this
problem. As far as I know scopes in npm are not globally unique, they're tied to
a specific registry just like unscoped names are. However what scopes do enable
is an obvious mechanism for grouping related projects and the ability for a user
or organization on npm.org to claim an entire scope, which makes explicit
configuration significantly easier to handle because you can be assured that
there's a whole little slice of the namespace that wholly belongs to you, and
you can easily write a rule that assigns an entire scope to a specific non
public registry.

Unfortunately, it basically ends up being an easier version of the idea to only
use explicit configuration, which works ok in npm because its not particularly
common for people to use their own registries, but in Python we encourage you to
do just that.

> Open questions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Open Questions
```

Title case for top-level headings is the convention both in this PEP and with PEPs generally

Author: My editor, for whatever reason, keeps trying to correct caps like this into lowercase versions. I assume just some impedance mismatch between using a code editor to write prose. Thanks for catching one I missed to correct manually.

==============

1. The `original proposal document <https://docs.google.com/document/d/184fQkb6NggVQfYmjTDA7p_U3iWDKk6grc2DigT1X3Es/>`__
   was targeted more specifically to a change to pip, and went into more
   specific details as to what we expected from pip. Since dictating UX to
   installers isn't something that we do in PEPs, I've rewritten those parts to

>    be more generic, however that means that we lose the information on

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   be more generic; however, that means that we lose the information on
```

   repository files. Is that fine? Or should we standardize what a repository
   file looks like so the same file can be given to multiple installers instead
   of hand waving around the specific mechanism installers would use for
   explicit configuration?
2. Is the Appendix section on communicating the change useful or confusing?

Appendix: Communicating the Change
==================================

*Note: This is pip specific and assumes specifics about how pip will choose to

> implement this PEP, it's included as an example of how we can communicate this

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
implement this PEP; it's included as an example of how we can communicate this
```

change out to end users as the ecosystem rolls this change out. The entire
Appendix should be considered to be a single communication (blog post, discuss
post, email, whatever).*

> There's a long-standing class of attacks that are called "dependency confusion"

Reviewer 2: Just to note, this would of course need some copyediting if we do end up using this as the basis to send out user-facing communications.

Author: Added a note to this effect.

-----------------

When pip discovers that the same project is available from multiple remote
repositories, by default it will generate an error and refuse to proceed rather
than make a guess about which repository was the correct one to install from.

Projects that natively publish to multiple repositories will be given the
ability to safely "link" their repositories together so that pip does not error
when those repositories are used together.

End users of pip will be given the ability to explicitly define one or more
repositories that are valid for a specific project, causing pip to only consider
those repositories for that project, and avoiding generating an error
altogether.

See TBD for more information.

Who is Affected?
----------------

Users who are installing from multiple remote (e.g. not present on the local
filesystem) repositories may be affected by having pip error instead of
successfully install if:

- They install a project where the same "name" is being served by multiple
  remote repositories.
- The project name that is available from multiple remote repositories has not
  used one of the defined mechanisms to link those repositories together.

> - The user invoking pip has not used the define mechanism to explicitly control

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The user invoking pip has not used the defined mechanism to explicitly control
```

Typo

          "hashes": {"sha256": "...", "blake2b": "..."},
          "requires-python": ">=3.7",
          "yanked": "Had a vulnerability"
        },
        {
          "filename": "holygrail-1.0-py3-none-any.whl",
          "url": "https://example.com/files/holygrail-1.0-py3-none-any.whl",
          "hashes": {"sha256": "...", "blake2b": "..."},
          "requires-python": ">=3.7",
          "dist-info-metadata": true
        }
      ]
    }

HTML
~~~~

.. code-block:: HTML

    <!DOCTYPE html>
    <html>
      <head>
        <meta name="pypi:repository-version" content="1.2">
        <meta name="pypi:tracks" content="https://pypi.org/simple/holygrail/">
      </head>
      <body>
        <a href="https://example.com/files/holygrail-1.0.tar.gz#sha256=...">
        <a href="https://example.com/files/holygrail-1.0-py3-none-any.whl#sha256=...">
      </body>
    </html>

"Alternate Locations" Metadata
------------------------------

To enable a project to extend its namespace across multiple repositories, this
PEP allows a project owner to declare a list of "alternate locations" for their
project. This is exposed in JSON as the key ``alternate-locations`` and in HTML

> as a meta element named ``pypi-alternate-locations``, which may be used multiple

Reviewer 6: Should be ``pypi:alternate-locations``

Abstract
========

> This PEP proposes extending the :ref:`Simple Repository API <packaging:simple-repository-api>`
> to allow repository operators to indicate that a project found on their
> repository "tracks" a project on a different repository and allows projects to
> extend their namespace in one repository across multiple repositories.

Author: What about something like this?

```suggestion
Dependency confusion attacks, in which a malicious package is installed instead
of the one the user expected, are an `increasingly common supply chain threat <https://medium.com/@alex.birsan/dependency-confusion-4a5d60fec610>`__,
including the recent PyTorch ``torchtriton`` incident. Most such attacks against
Python dependencies, including the `recent PyTorch incident <https://pytorch.org/blog/compromised-nightly-dependency/>`_,
occur with multiple package repositories, where a dependency expected to come
from one repository (e.g. a custom index) is installed from another (e.g. PyPI).

To help address this problem, this PEP proposes extending the
:ref:`Simple Repository API <packaging:simple-repository-api>`
to allow repository operators to indicate that a project found on their
repository "tracks" a project on a different repository and allows projects to
extend their namespace from one repository across multiple repositories.

These features will allow installers to determine when a project being available
from a particular mix of repositories is expected and they should allow it or
when it is unexpected and they should instead throw an error to halt the
install.
```

> This PEP proposes extending the :ref:`Simple Repository API <packaging:simple-repository-api>`
> to allow repository operators to indicate that a project found on their
> repository "tracks" a project on a different repository and allows projects to
> extend their namespace in one repository across multiple repositories.

Reviewer 2: Looks pretty good, with a few further fixes (some of my own mistakes):

* Fix the grammar and phrasing of the last sentance
* In the closing, emphasize the motivation for installers halting/erroring—to protect the user
* Remove my previous redundant "including the recent PyTorch/pytriton incdent" that I'd accidentally repeated due to an editing goof
* Fix a few phrasing issues in the original language that I didn't previously

```suggestion
Dependency confusion attacks, in which a malicious package is installed instead
of the one the user expected, are an `increasingly common supply chain threat 
<https://medium.com/@alex.birsan/dependency-confusion-4a5d60fec610>`__.
Most such attacks against Python dependencies, including the
`recent PyTorch incident <https://pytorch.org/blog/compromised-nightly-dependency/>`_,
occur with multiple package repositories, where a dependency expected to come
from one repository (e.g. a custom index) is installed from another (e.g. PyPI).

To help address this problem, this PEP proposes extending the
:ref:`Simple Repository API <packaging:simple-repository-api>`
to allow repository operators to indicate that a project found on their
repository "tracks" a project on a different repository, and allows projects to
extend their namespace to span multiple repositories.

These features will allow installers to determine when a project being made available
from a particular mix of repositories is expected and should be allowed,
and when it is not and should halt the install with an error to protect the user.
```

> extend their namespace in one repository across multiple repositories.

Author: LGTM

flatten these multiple namespaces into one that contains the files from all
namespaces.

This assumption that collapsing the namespaces is what was expected, means that
when the different names in different repositories are not the same (such as in

> the ``torchtriton`` case) dependency confusion attacks become possible.

Author: Oops, that's because for some reason I typed different when I meant same.

safe.

How to Communicate This

> =======================

Reviewer 2: SGTM :+1:

do just that.

Open Questions
==============

> 1. The `original proposal document <https://docs.google.com/document/d/184fQkb6NggVQfYmjTDA7p_U3iWDKk6grc2DigT1X3Es/>`__

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*  The `original proposal document <https://docs.google.com/document/d/184fQkb6NggVQfYmjTDA7p_U3iWDKk6grc2DigT1X3Es/>`__
```

You might not want to number these, since there's only one item currently, there isn't an unambiguous order and it would be easy for items to get out of sync when adding, removing or changing items.
